README.md, before:

[rust-base64](https://crates.io/crates/base64)
===

It's base64. What more could anyone want?

Example
---

In Cargo.toml: `base64 = "~0.3.0"`

```rust
    extern crate base64;

    use base64::{encode, decode};

    fn main() {
        let a = b"hello world";
        let b = "aGVsbG8gd29ybGQ=";

        assert_eq!(encode(a), b);
        assert_eq!(a, &decode(b).unwrap()[..]);
    }
```

API
---

NOTE: return types have changed from 0.1.x. `decode_ws` is deprecated, functionally equivalent to not-yet-implemented MIME mode which will replace it (or perhaps an alternate way of passing options if there is a usecase for whitespace-ignoring UrlSafe).

NOTE: previously (<= 0.2.x) decoding would ignore extraneous padding bytes; this is no longer the case, and such input will produce an InvalidByte error.

rust-base64 exposes seven functions:

```rust
    encode(&[u8]) -> String
    decode(&str) -> Result<Vec<u8>, Base64Error>
    encode_mode(&[u8], Base64Mode) -> String
    decode_mode(&str, Base64Mode) -> Result<Vec<u8>, Base64Error>
    encode_mode_buf(&[u8], Base64Mode, &mut String)
    decode_mode_buf(&str, Base64Mode, &mut Vec<u8>) -> Result<(), Base64Error>
    decode_ws(&str) -> Result<Vec<u8>, Base64Error>
```

Valid modes are `Base64Mode::Standard` and `Base64Mode::UrlSafe`, which aim to be fully compliant with [RFC 4648](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4648). MIME mode ([RFC 2045](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2045.txt)) is forthcoming. `encode` and `decode` are convenience wrappers for the `_mode` functions called with `Base64Mode::Standard`, which are themselves wrappers of the `_buf` functions that allocate. `decode_ws` does the same as `decode` after first stripping whitespace ("whitespace" according to the rules of Javascript's `btoa()`, meaning \n \r \f \t and space). Encode produces valid padding in all cases; decode produces the same output for valid or omitted padding, but errors on invalid (superfluous) padding.

Goals
---

MIME support, along with replacing the mode enum with config structs. It is unlikely I will add much, if anything, to the feature set beyond that. I'd like to improve on the test cases, confirm full compliance with the standard, and then focus on making it smaller and more performant.

I have a fondness for small dependency footprints, ecosystems where you can pick and choose what functionality you need, and no more. Unix philosophy sort of thing I guess, many tiny utilities interoperating across a common interface. One time making a Twitter bot, I ran into the need to correctly pluralize arbitrary words. I found on npm a module that did nothing but pluralize words. Nothing else, just a couple of functions. I'd like for this to be that "just a couple of functions."

Developing
---

Benchmarks are in `benches/`. Running them requires nightly rust, but `rustup` makes it easy:

```
rustup run nightly cargo bench
```

Decoding is aided by some pre-calculated tables, which are generated by:

```
cargo run --bin make_decode_table > src/decode_tables.rs.tmp && mv src/decode_tables.rs.tmp src/decode_tables.rs
```

Profiling
---

On Linux, you can use [perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) for profiling. First, enable debug symbols in Cargo.toml. Don't commit this change, though, since it's usually not what you want (and costs some performance):

```
[profile.release]
debug = true
```

Then compile the benchmarks. (Just re-run them and ^C once the benchmarks start running; all that's needed is to recompile them.)

Run the benchmark binary with `perf` (shown here filtering to one particular benchmark, which will make the results easier to read). `perf` is only available to the root user on most systems as it fiddles with event counters in your CPU, so use `sudo`. We need to run the actual benchmark binary, hence the path into `target`. You can see the actual full path with `rustup run nightly cargo bench -v`; it will print out the commands it runs. If you use the exact path that `bench` outputs, make sure you get the one that's for the benchmarks, not the tests.:

```
sudo perf record target/release/deps/benchmarks-* decode_10mib_reuse
```

Then analyze the results, again with perf:

```
sudo perf annnotate -l
```

You'll see a bunch of interleaved rust source and assembly like this. The section with `lib.rs:327` is telling us that 4.02% of samples saw the `movzbl` aka bit shift as the active instruction. However, this percentage is not as exact as it seems due to a phenomenon called *skid*. Basically, a consequence of how fancy modern CPUs are is that this sort of instruction profiling is inherently inaccurate, especially in branch-heavy code.

```
 lib.rs:322    0.70 :     10698:       mov    %rdi,%rax
    2.82 :        1069b:       shr    $0x38,%rax
         :                  if morsel == decode_tables::INVALID_VALUE {
         :                      bad_byte_index = input_index;
         :                      break;
         :                  };
         :                  accum = (morsel as u64) << 58;
 lib.rs:327    4.02 :     1069f:       movzbl (%r9,%rax,1),%r15d
         :              // fast loop of 8 bytes at a time
         :              while input_index < length_of_full_chunks {
         :                  let mut accum: u64;
         :
         :                  let input_chunk = BigEndian::read_u64(&input_bytes[input_index..(input_index + 8)]);
         :                  morsel = decode_table[(input_chunk >> 56) as usize];
 lib.rs:322    3.68 :     106a4:       cmp    $0xff,%r15
         :                  if morsel == decode_tables::INVALID_VALUE {
    0.00 :        106ab:       je     1090e <base64::decode_mode_buf::hbf68a45fefa299c1+0x46e>
```

Commit message:

Add config struct instead of mode
Based on rustc-serialize, minus the MIME
specific fields

README.md, after:

[rust-base64](https://crates.io/crates/base64)
===

It's base64. What more could anyone want?

Example
---

In Cargo.toml: `base64 = "~0.3.0"`

```rust
    extern crate base64;

    use base64::{encode, decode};

    fn main() {
        let a = b"hello world";
        let b = "aGVsbG8gd29ybGQ=";

        assert_eq!(encode(a), b);
        assert_eq!(a, &decode(b).unwrap()[..]);
    }
```

API
---

NOTE: return types have changed from 0.1.x. `decode_ws` is deprecated, functionally equivalent to not-yet-implemented MIME mode which will replace it (or perhaps an alternate way of passing options if there is a usecase for whitespace-ignoring UrlSafe).

NOTE: previously (<= 0.2.x) decoding would ignore extraneous padding bytes; this is no longer the case, and such input will produce an InvalidByte error.

rust-base64 exposes seven functions:

```rust
    encode(&[u8]) -> String
    decode(&str) -> Result<Vec<u8>, Base64Error>
    encode_config(&[u8], Config) -> String
    decode_config(&str, Config) -> Result<Vec<u8>, Base64Error>
    encode_config_buf(&[u8], Config, &mut String)
    decode_config_buf(&str, Config, &mut Vec<u8>) -> Result<(), Base64Error>
    decode_ws(&str) -> Result<Vec<u8>, Base64Error>
```

Config supported out of the box are `STANDARD`, `URL_SAFE` and `URL_SAFE_NO_PAD`, which aim to be fully compliant with [RFC 4648](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4648). MIME mode ([RFC 2045](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2045.txt)) is forthcoming. `encode` and `decode` are convenience wrappers for the `_mode` functions called with `Base64Mode::Standard`, which are themselves wrappers of the `_buf` functions that allocate. `decode_ws` does the same as `decode` after first stripping whitespace ("whitespace" according to the rules of Javascript's `btoa()`, meaning \n \r \f \t and space). Encode produces valid padding in all cases; decode produces the same output for valid or omitted padding, but errors on invalid (superfluous) padding.

Goals
---

MIME support, along with replacing the mode enum with config structs. It is unlikely I will add much, if anything, to the feature set beyond that. I'd like to improve on the test cases, confirm full compliance with the standard, and then focus on making it smaller and more performant.

I have a fondness for small dependency footprints, ecosystems where you can pick and choose what functionality you need, and no more. Unix philosophy sort of thing I guess, many tiny utilities interoperating across a common interface. One time making a Twitter bot, I ran into the need to correctly pluralize arbitrary words. I found on npm a module that did nothing but pluralize words. Nothing else, just a couple of functions. I'd like for this to be that "just a couple of functions."

Developing
---

Benchmarks are in `benches/`. Running them requires nightly rust, but `rustup` makes it easy:

```
rustup run nightly cargo bench
```

Decoding is aided by some pre-calculated tables, which are generated by:

```
cargo run --bin make_decode_table > src/decode_tables.rs.tmp && mv src/decode_tables.rs.tmp src/decode_tables.rs
```

Profiling
---

On Linux, you can use [perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) for profiling. First, enable debug symbols in Cargo.toml. Don't commit this change, though, since it's usually not what you want (and costs some performance):

```
[profile.release]
debug = true
```

Then compile the benchmarks. (Just re-run them and ^C once the benchmarks start running; all that's needed is to recompile them.)

Run the benchmark binary with `perf` (shown here filtering to one particular benchmark, which will make the results easier to read). `perf` is only available to the root user on most systems as it fiddles with event counters in your CPU, so use `sudo`. We need to run the actual benchmark binary, hence the path into `target`. You can see the actual full path with `rustup run nightly cargo bench -v`; it will print out the commands it runs. If you use the exact path that `bench` outputs, make sure you get the one that's for the benchmarks, not the tests.:

```
sudo perf record target/release/deps/benchmarks-* decode_10mib_reuse
```

Then analyze the results, again with perf:

```
sudo perf annnotate -l
```

You'll see a bunch of interleaved rust source and assembly like this. The section with `lib.rs:327` is telling us that 4.02% of samples saw the `movzbl` aka bit shift as the active instruction. However, this percentage is not as exact as it seems due to a phenomenon called *skid*. Basically, a consequence of how fancy modern CPUs are is that this sort of instruction profiling is inherently inaccurate, especially in branch-heavy code.

```
 lib.rs:322    0.70 :     10698:       mov    %rdi,%rax
    2.82 :        1069b:       shr    $0x38,%rax
         :                  if morsel == decode_tables::INVALID_VALUE {
         :                      bad_byte_index = input_index;
         :                      break;
         :                  };
         :                  accum = (morsel as u64) << 58;
 lib.rs:327    4.02 :     1069f:       movzbl (%r9,%rax,1),%r15d
         :              // fast loop of 8 bytes at a time
         :              while input_index < length_of_full_chunks {
         :                  let mut accum: u64;
         :
         :                  let input_chunk = BigEndian::read_u64(&input_bytes[input_index..(input_index + 8)]);
         :                  morsel = decode_table[(input_chunk >> 56) as usize];
 lib.rs:322    3.68 :     106a4:       cmp    $0xff,%r15
         :                  if morsel == decode_tables::INVALID_VALUE {
    0.00 :        106ab:       je     1090e <base64::decode_mode_buf::hbf68a45fefa299c1+0x46e>
```
